I think they're on Zoom, the first submitter.
Yes. Um, they should be joining you now. Okay, thanks.
Good morning.
Good morning. Uh, Lynn, can you hear me?
I can, can you hear me? Yes, I can.
We can hear you and we can see you as well, which is great.
We have 10 minutes with you, so it's your time up to you
how you want to use this time.
Thank you. If you wanna speak to your submission,
leave some time for questions up to you. Thank you. Um,
So I'll say a few words and then
leave some time for questions.
Thanks for that. So good morning
and thank you for the opportunity
for the Financial Services Federation to speak
to our submission on this bill.
Um, as you can see from our submission,
the FSF is the industry body representing the specialist
lending sector operating in New Zealand.
And our members are commercial asset
and leasing finance providers, motor vehicle financiers,
credit unions, and building societies,
specialist housing lenders, point
of sale finance providers, et cetera.
And they have collectively 1.7 million New Zealand consumers
and businesses who choose to be their customers.
So whilst we're supportive of the bill's objectives,
particularly with respect
to reducing business compliance costs
and improving regulatory effective effectiveness
and efficiency, we are strongly opposed to the imposition
of an industry levy
to finance A-M-L-C-F-T regulatory activity.
Obviously, this is directly at odds
with achieving the objective of reducing compliance costs.
Frankly, we believe that placing the burden
to fund A-M-L-C-F-T supervisory
and enforcement activities on the businesses
that are already paying to meet their obligations
as the first line of defense against money laundering
and financing of terrorism in New Zealand is outrageous.
As we've said in our written submission,
we believe these activities should be funded directly from
the proceeds of crime fund so that the criminals
who are committing the offenses are the ones paying
for the cost of compliance.
We are therefore asking the committees, uh,
that the committee seriously considers removing the
requirement for industry to pay the levy
to fund A-M-L-C-F-T regulatory activities
and place this cost where it belongs
with the criminals committing the crimes.
Secondly, the FSF is supportive of the proposal to move
to a single A-M-L-C-F-T supervisor.
Other larger jurisdictions such as Australia, have been able
to manage their A-M-L-C-F-T regulatory activities
with one supervisor
and New Zealand should be able to do the same.
A single supervisor will remove any possibility of confusion
or mixed messages that can arise
with three separate supervisors.
However, we do sound a note of caution with respect
to the necessity of ensuring
that the supervisor is adequately resourced
and has the necessary expertise within its personnel
to understand the very diverse sectors they will be
supervising and the relative risks.
Each of these pose are being used to launder money
or finance terrorism to ensure
that they don't adopt a one size fits all approach.
We also have quite significant concerns about the proposed
extensions of powers to the DIA, a lot
of which are at the discretion of the chief executive.
Our concern with respect to this is
that the DIA is not subject to the same governance oversight
as the other current supervisors,
the Reserve Bank and the FMA.
This means in our view that the chief executive
of the DIA will have almost unchecked par,
which we believe is inappropriate.
This would include allowing a supervisor
to issue binding codes,
and we believe that mandatory consultation periods
with affected entities must be a requirement
for any such codes to ensure
that they support practical compliance.
There also needs to be an understanding on the part
of the supervisor that many
of the entities they will be supervising are
very small businesses.
These do not necessarily have dedicated compliance teams
like larger institutions do, and
therefore may not be able to respond
to urgent requests from the supervisor
as quickly as they may wish.
Finally, whilst we welcome the further clarification in the
bill that address verification is not required
for standard due diligence, we note
that there's a similar provision in the current statute's
amendment bill that is before the house.
It would be helpful for reporting entities to understand
how the two bills will work together.
Um, and it's also imperative that we just get on
and remove the address verification requirement,
particularly from the perspective of financial inclusion
for people who are not easy, easily able
to provide such evidence of their address.
So that's, that's the main, um, points of our submission
and I'm happy to take any questions,
Members, any questions?
All right. Uh, Lynn, I have a question.
So, um, you are opposing the, the levy.
Um, what would you say to the view of those who think that,
uh, entities that benefit from a safe financial system
should be contributing towards maintaining it as well?
What would you say to that view?
That's a really good question. Thank you for asking.
I think, um, the, the fact is they already are, um,
they are already paying for that compliance through having,
um, to have the compliance within their business of, um,
a proper risk assessment of, of their,
of their own particular risk of, um, being used
for laundering money or finance and terrorism.
They have to have processes in place.
They have to have, uh, regular audits of their process,
which is a, um, from an independent, um, body, which is,
which is a very expensive exercise, they have to have,
um, a ML offices.
They have to have, uh, appropriate reporting
to their board and governance structure.
They are already paying to be the first line
of defense against money laundering
and countering fi financing of terrorism to then have
to pay on top of that a levy to be supervised,
um, when they are not.
The problem just seems, um, in, in my view
and the view of our members
to be disproportionate and unfair.
Just another question on that.
So, uh, cost of audits
and the reporting that the requirements, uh, don't you think
that is like, that comes with the nature of the business,
that that is like the basic require requirement you would
expect from these businesses?
Yes. Yeah, I would agree with that.
And, and, and they're doing it, um, and have been doing it.
Um, our members have been part of the A ML, uh,
regime right from the very beginning.
So they have worn their, the compliance cost
for a number of years already.
Um, and they're already doing it.
And, you know, they do understand
that there is the possibility that they could be used
to find to, to, uh, launder money.
Um, so they take that very seriously.
They take the, the reporting of suspicious transactions
or suspicious, suspicious activity very seriously.
We do a lot of training with our members, um,
on updating them on what's happening with a ML,
any changes to the regime.
Um, we get the supervisors in, um, we get a ML experts in
to talk to our members about trends that they're seeing,
risks to look out for, all of that sort of thing.
So they're, they're already paying for, um,
very strong compliance and they believe in and,
and very strong compliance and,
and understand the need for it.
It's this extra step in this extra cost
of imposing the levy on the already compliant people
who are already doing their best to prevent a ML and,
and, uh, prevent money laundering
and terrorism financing that they're objecting to.
Alright. We have a question now from Dr. David Wilson.
Rudy Lynn. Um, thank you very much.
Yeah, you're very good.
Uh, submission, um, you mentioned that you could be in favor
of a single A MLC supervisor if that were to be, so
what would your choice be?
Um, well, I do think the DIA already has a very broad
range of supervisory activity.
The, the RBN Z's very much just focused on banks
and non-bank deposit takers.
Um, and the FMA focuses on the financial advisors.
So it does make sense
that the DIA become the, the supervisor.
The concern is around just, um, ensuring
that the chief executive
of the DIA doesn't have completely unchecked par
because the DIA has a different governance structure to, to
that of the RBNZ and the FMA, I mean, they will be taking on
a lot of extra work, um, because the banks are large and,
and, um, and you know, the non-bank deposit takers are not,
of course, uh, they're quite small,
but the banks are extremely large in that
that will create a lot more work for them.
So I think our point was about making sure
that they were adequately resourced and,
and I think, you know, it would make sense to me
to be considering how they can bring people across from RBNZ
and FMA who are experts in the A ML supervision
of their particular fields,
how they can bring those people across to be part
of their team and cross pollinate that, that, um,
that knowledge and experience.
Thank you. Thank you so much, Lynn,
for your submission and for your time.
Thank you. Bye-bye.
Thank you. You're welcome. Thanks very much.
Very much. So, next we have blind low vision.
Good morning, Andrea,
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you. That's good.
We have 10 minutes with you. Thank you.
After you how you want to use this time, if you want
to speak to your submission, leave some time
for questions. Up to you. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, so my name is Andrea Gin.
I'm the CEO of Blind Vision, uh, New Zealand
we're the operating name of the Royal New Zealand Foundation
and the Blind and our organization has been, uh, around
for 130 years.
Um, we exist
to empower approximately 16,000 clients across the motto
who are blind, deaf, blind
or have low vision to live the life they choose.
We estimate that 193,000 New Zealand does live
with vision loss and that's expect, um, to, to grow
to 225,000 by 2028.
Some of the common eye conditions include age related
macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy,
glaucoma, and cataracts.
And this is very indicative
of our aging population for the growth.
Um, B-L-B-N-Z is a recipient
of both funding grants and gifts from wills.
Um, the work of, uh, B-L-B-N-Z has
for a great many years substantially depended on the
goodwill of New Zealand society
and private donations both into Veeva.
And it's not uncommon for many people
to make financial provision to blv and Z in their wills
and gifts from an estate can arrange in value anywhere
between low hundreds of dollars to multimillions.
Our data shows that 40% to 70%
of our donations come from gifts left and wills.
The percent depends on the size
of the gift that has been willed.
It's important that both the person who has left the gift
as well as the family
and loved ones, that they have confidence
that the benefactor receives what was intended.
So in terms of our context of our submission,
we support the need for a single supervisor
as proposing the bill.
However, there needs to be further clarity
and consistency in the way the requirements are interpreted
and also implied to the intermediaries.
The complexity and variation in a ML requirements can
constitute unnecessary pressures on recipient organizations.
There are significant variations in
what different organizations require in terms of a ML
and some of which are time consuming
and incur unnecessary costs for charities, which is not
in keeping with the explanatory note for this bill.
Uh, and these consistencies result in, um,
increased administrative and volunteer time costs.
Charities must spend limited staff
and volunteer capacity on compliance
instead of delivering services.
And this can result in fewer programs being run reduced
support to beneficiaries, um, and our clients
and greater burnout among already stretched teams.
Um, there's also disproportionate compliance burdens.
So regulatory obligations
that do not match the actual risk profile can discourage
donors and executors, um, potentially leading
to fewer bequests being realized.
And for charities, this means lost opportunities
to fund long-term projects
and reduce confidence in their ability
to steward gifts effectively.
Um, registered charities are already required
to identify the governing trustee
or members under the charities Act 2005
with a ML requirements, thus duplicating a level
of formal disclosure.
So in conclusion, we require clarity within the drafted
bill, as well as any regulations that provide clarity
and consistency in the way the requirements are interpreted
and applied by intermediaries.
Um, being able to live to gift
and will to blind low vision is not just about honoring
those wishes of the departed loved ones,
but also to honor those who receive support.
Um, blind low vision can only continue
to build on the goodwill of New Zealanders
and private donations of the rules
and regulations can be easily understood and complied with.
Thank you.
That's good. Um, yeah,
so I am looking around for any questions.
No, um, Andrea, I'll ask one question.
So how is the compliance burden looking for you currently?
Uh, well, like all compliance that it's a,
it's a necessary, um, thing to do,
but, uh, again, as I said earlier, with stretch resources,
I mean, our organization is there to provide services.
Um, the impact as all these compliance costs go up is
that we have to reduce services,
and that will actually in the end, um,
put a burden on the government to, to support the blind,
deaf, blind and, and low vision community.
Thank you so much, Andrea,
for your submission. Thank you for your time.
Kira,
Have the, we have a submitter after that, so Yep. We,
If Andrea is still there. I have a question for
Andrew.
Yes, Andrea, are you still there?
I am. Oh, that's great.
So, uh, we have a question from Dr. David Wilson,
if you don't mind answering that.
No. Yeah.
Hi Andrea. Thank you very much for your submission.
Um, just a little bit interested in your views on the
restricted, uh, distributions in excess of $50,000
and what you've said today.
Um, flags of red.
Well, it gives me a red flag in terms of the fact that, um,
much of the anti-money laundering happens
in receiving banks, much of the money laundering.
So there's quite a lot of compliance at both ends,
and you are not, and you are talking about being able
to verify that the benefactor receives what was intended.
Um, so we have a pinch point, don't we?
Yep, absolutely. You
Make comment on that for us, please.
Yeah, I mean, we, we understand why, um, the necessity
for it all, but it is impacting on us to be able
to receive something that someone's simply left in their
will and not expecting us to bear the burden of, um, cost
to be able to realize that gift.
Okay. So the 50 thousand's, like an arbitrary amount
that's imposed on you, correct?
Yeah. Thank you.
Okay, thank you Andrea, Kara.
Yep. Bye-bye. Alright, so we have, uh, Cignas Law Limited.
Thanks.
I think I saw Simon online before, but he's disappeared.
Okay.
Yeah, he was there. Yeah. Good morning, Simon.
Uh, good morning. Can you hear me?
We can hear you and we can see you as well.
We have 10 minutes with you.
Great. Thank you for the opportunity to make a submission.
Uh, so I am a lawyer and I have a law firm, CIS Law.
So Cigna's Law is subject to the A-M-L-C-F-T regime
as a reporting entity
and also advisors clients on compliance with the regime.
Um, so Cignas law submission boils down to one key point,
and that's the proposed delegation of rulemaking powers
to the chief executive of the Department
of Internal Affairs, who will be the effective person
and to the commissioner of police should not
be approved by the committee.
That's because the Ministry of Justice
and the A ML supervisors have shown, in my view,
an overwhelming interest in increasing regulation regardless
of the costs or benefits.
At the same time, they've shown little interest
and measures to address unnecessary A ML regulation,
even with the government's focus on reducing UN
unnecessary A ML regulation.
The four current bills making changes
to the A-M-L-C-F-T Act are still overwhelmingly focused on
MA matters other than deregulation.
And this current bill is an example of that.
The initiative to remove unnecessary a ML regulation has
been championed by the parties making up the governing
coalition, not by the Ministry of Justice
or any government agencies.
I appreciate that the delegation
of rule making powers will have a moderate impact on if
timeliness of of rulemaking.
However, remind you,
the overwhelming focus on officials is on
increasing regulation.
So it's very likely that the rulemaking powers will be used
to impose even more
a ML obligations on reporting entities without
adequate consideration of the costs
and benefits of doing that,
that negative outcome will outweigh any efficiency gains.
And in any case,
the current system has already resulted in dozens
of new regulations being imposed over the last three years.
So the, the current regime seems quite capable of, um,
churning out lots of rules.
So I submit that the power make rules on a ML matters are
retained by the executive,
and that the existing delegated powers in relation
to a ML matters are retained by the Minister of Justice.
Um, on a slightly diff different topic,
but related, um, I've noted in Cignas law's submission,
my view that the implementation
of the A ML regulatory regime has been somewhat chaotic,
which is another reason to be
cautious about devolving rulemaking powers in the schedule
to the submission, I've listed the 60 different documents
issued by government agencies
and the police that are relevant to Cignas Law
as a reporting entity.
Many of them are legally binding to various extents.
They're presented as a confetti of guidelines, fact sheets,
FAQs statements, and codes of practice.
Most are individual PDF documents.
There is no central register of those documents.
There is no system
for advising when they're issued or updated.
There is no system for advising when they're canceled
and none has ever been issued with an implementation period
that would actually give reporting entities time to comply
before they come into force.
So in my view, on any measure, the the information
and document management of government agencies in relation
to these matters has been somewhat lacking.
So regardless of the committee's view on the proposed
rulemaking powers, I would urge the committee to require
that the bill be updated to mandate
that those documents are issued
and managed in a much more effective manner to assist.
So you can, that would assist reporting entities
and better complying with the regime
and also allow 'em
to focus more on matters other than trying to keep up
to date with what documents have been issued and updated.
Another key consideration in relation
to the PDF documents is that they're not inherently readable
by generative AI tools such as Chat, GPT
and Google's AI overview.
The increasing use of AI software as a primary tool
for obtaining information from the internet means
that many people, uh, will miss relevant law
and guidance set out on PDF documents.
So the practice of using PDF documents as a method
for publishing a ML rules
and guides should not be supported.
So at the very least, I submit the bill require
that all rules and other outcomes of the exercise,
of delegated powers be published in hyper text markup
language and that they'd be published on one webpage so
that they're much easier to find and access.
So thank you. That's a, a brief summary of my submissions.
I'd be happy to answer questions if there are any.
Thank you, Simon. And we have a question from Dr.
Uh, thank you Madam Chair, and thank you
for your submission and um, that very practical, uh, advice.
It's very useful to hear that kind of thing
and to see all of those, uh, separate pieces
of law just pertaining to this one aspect, um,
makes me wonder, uh, how many other, uh,
lists like this must there be, um, for various different,
um, elements of the law that you have to deal with.
And, um, I guess, have you ever,
have you made any submissions to, um, any of our, um,
digitizing government or anything else like that?
Uh, no, I haven't. I just don't have the,
the time to do that.
Yeah, I'm aware of those, uh, of, of
that work being undertaken.
I dunno what to what extent it will apply to all
of the matters I've pointed out.
Mm-hmm. Um, so it'd be great if that could, that
that could be a tool to address that.
But, um, I,
I just wonder whether there's an opportunity in this bill
to at least prompt or set some minimum standards regardless.
For example, as I said, requiring that, uh,
everything be published A as HTML rather than as PDF, so
that at least it's machine readable in the first instance.
Okay. Thank you very much.
That's good. Thank you someone, Simon. Thank you.
Thank you. Alright.
Um, so do we have, um, real Estate Institute? Oh, thank you.
Good morning.
Morning. Can you hear me okay?
Yes, we can hear you and we can see you as well.
Is that Janine and Lizzie?
Yes, yes. Thank you.
We have 10 minutes with you. Thank you.
Yes, yes. Thank you Chair
and uh, select committee members for the opportunity
to make our oral submissions today.
On behalf of the Real Estate Institute of New Zealand, uh,
as you said, I'm Lizzie Riley, I'm the chief executive,
and with me I've got Melissa BA here
and I've also actually got Janine Tan as well.
So, uh, Ryan, you probably know Ryan's
as a membership organization representing approximate
approximately 95%
of the real estate sector across New Zealand,
where are re we represent all of the sectors
of real estate from residential to commercial
and industrial sales and leasing to business brokering.
Um, and overall we support approximately 17,
17,000 real estate professionals.
So advocating on behalf
of our members is a very important issue,
and we focus on the issues that impact them the most.
Um, we welcome the opportunity
to highlight our members' concerns about this
A-M-L-C-F-T amendment bill.
The real estate sector is highly compliant
and A-M-L-C-F-T compliance costs are already
disproportionate for our sector.
Our members are very, very concerned
by this proposed new industry levy.
Years back, our members estimated the cost
of a ML compliance collectively at around $30 million,
and we expect that this would be far greater.
Now, some members tell us on a daily basis
that they spend hundreds of thousands of dollars every year
in both direct costs and the time of their teams.
Just to keep up with the A ML compliance,
the real estate sector should definitely be excluded from
this proposed new levy for the reasons which
I'll let Melissa go into further.
Good morning. So the vast majority
of real estate agencies are small
to medium sized businesses,
and our members tell us how incredibly challenging it is
for them to meet their obligations while still running
viable agencies.
So many operate on really tight margins
and they just can't absorb another cost.
So an additional levy is likely in many
or most cases to be passed on to consumers,
and this is likely to occur by a way
of a higher administrative fee charged to a vendor.
So since phase two of the regime came into effect in 2019,
our members have made major investments.
So this is things like customer due diligence, um,
training staff nationwide, upgrading systems
and processes, annual reporting, ongoing audits,
and for small to medium sized business, small
to medium sized agencies.
This is a really heavy burden
and it's disproportionate to the level of risk posed
by the real estate agency work that's captured.
I think it's also important to note the risk profile
of our sector is materially lower
than high risk sectors such as banking and finance.
So our sector is very compliant.
Um, it takes our,
our sector takes their a ML obligations very seriously.
So the national risk assessment
last year confirmed the real estate sector's risk profile
has remained unchanged since 2019.
So a risk-based system, which we know is what is intended,
should focus resources
and levy costs on higher risk sectors
where more work is required.
So, for instance, the real estate sector is not a large
filer of PTs or prescribed transaction reports.
By contrast, the higher risk sectors generate significantly
higher workload for the supervisor.
So the unintended consequence of this new levy is likely
to be additional costs being passed on
to everyday kiwis buying or selling a home.
They're going to pay more, not
because real estate sales people are earning more, but
'cause of additional regulatory costs.
So in summary, we strongly advocate
for the real estate sector to be
excluded from this new levy altogether.
Our members are already shouldering a disproportionate
compliance burden
and imposing an additional levy as unjustified
and risks unintended consequences impacting consumers.
So in the event our sector is not excluded from the levy,
then in our view, the levy framework has to be fair,
transparent, proportionate, truly risk-based,
and there needs to be broad consultation with our sector,
and the consultation has to be mandatory.
Um, it's important to note the real estate
sector is very diverse.
So you've got small family businesses,
you've got large family businesses, you've got corporates
with extensive national operations.
There's no sort of one size fits all approach
that will work here.
And lastly, the cost
of supervising a high risk sector like banking
cannot be subsidized by lower risk sectors like real estate.
Those are kind of the main points we wanted to reiterate.
Do you have questions for us?
So, um, do you, um,
I suggest you finish speaking to your submission.
Have you finished speaking?
Do you have a few more points you said?
Uh, no, no, those are the main points we wanted to make.
Oh, okay. Thank you. Uh, any questions members?
Um, so there are no questions here.
There's a, oh, there is a question from Dr. David Wilson.
Thank you. Um,
Thank you for your submission.
Um, can you tell me if, uh, what percentage
of your transactions go through banks?
We don't have the data with us, like as in, sorry,
we don't have the information with us at the moment on
how it goes through banks.
And that's why we think that we will need a target
consultation for the industry to better know how the,
how this proposed level will impact the day-to-day business
operations of the real estate agency.
So, um, with that in mind, which area do you think, um,
is the highest risk in terms in terms of money laundering?
Which sector? Where's the pinch point?
Banking and finance sector?
I mean, also you need to bear in mind
that you've got real estate agents who are doing CDD
and then you've got banks and you've got solicitors
and you've got accountants doing CDD on those exact same
parties and they have more visibility of the transaction.
The MRA, the 2024 NRA,
the National Risk Assessment has also highlighted the high
risk sectors, which are the banks, the money remitters
and the virtual asset providers, uh,
virtual asset service providers.
So these will be the high risk sectors that we think
that the government should focus their resources, um, on.
Thank you. All right, that's good.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Alright, um, so.